Everyone welcome back in this lecture.
We are going to go over a problem you are going to experience if you try and export your work as an
animated gif.
There is a problem when you use labour groups.
Gimped just cannot handle it.
And so you have to do a bit of manual work.
So let's go ahead here and create a lay a group just for example can I put a background in it.
And then go ahead and create another layer as we would do eyebrows.
That's fine.
We can call them eyebrows and let's zoom into our work and draw a couple of eyebrows on the background
let's say we were just animating the eyebrows themselves.
There's our smiley face that we're doing.
We've got this layer here.
Now I can then go ahead and let's do it properly.
Let's name this frame.
Hash one.
And then when I duplicate I'll get the necessary frames.
Now there's nothing moving here.
But that's not the issue.
You're going to experience if we go ahead and try and export this as a test animation it's fine in this
case.
I'm going to go ahead and export now oh look like it.
Everything's working as you'd want it to.
However you go ahead and click export you'll get an error message like this cannot save the r.g. BE
colour images convert index colour or greyscale first.
This is a little bit of an issue it's caused by an gimped trying to blend those layer groups together
before exporting as a frame.
The quickest way of solving this or one of the ways of solving this is going in and right clicking on
the frame and merging the layer group you can flatten that layer group down into a single frame.
This can be a little arduous of course with many many frames so I would recommend saving your work first
then saving another copy with perhaps flattened on the end of it followed by then doing this procedure
so that you don't suffer any risk of losing your data or losing this deliberate separation of your items
so that you can manipulate your image easily.
If you get rid of this if you compress it down by making it sending it all to one layer it make it a
lot harder to edit in the future and we want to avoid any situations that puts us at a disadvantage.
Another option that you can do at this point is to go to the image menu.
Go down to mode and you'll see there's an option for greyscale and that was one of the options in our
error message that we had.
Now if you've got a black and white or grey scale animation that's absolutely fine but that's not really
an option would it is for me in this case if I was to go ahead and make this smiley face because it's
just black and white at the moment.
That's fine.
However if you have got colour in their indexes greyed out unfortunately so we can't use that.
So we're stuck with even doing greyscale which might not be ideal or of course we can go through and
update each one of these by right clicking as I said and merging the layer group.
Now this being said it's only really necessary if you're exporting as an animated gif for the purposes
of working in GIMP and perhaps making a sprite sheet later on you won't have to do that.
And if you can get away with go into animation and play back for your testing and when the animation
playback window comes up we go ahead and click play here.
Now obviously these are all going to be the same things that haven't changed anything.
But if that's enough to prove your animation great.
No other action required.
However if you do want to share as an animated gif like the challenge asks you to then of course you
will just have to bear that in mind and flatten it down to share it with us.
So with that out of the way it's time for a challenge and the challenge is going to be is to pick one
of the following so even the fire the bouncy ball the jumping the water splash the door opening all
the frown to grin.
I'm going to choose the frown to grin myself.
So you're going to go ahead now and pick one of those and have a mate.
It's now two seconds long.
At five to 10 frames per second.
Now the reason why there's a band there is you can have it running at five frames per second and it
gets the job done is a great starting point.
If you want to refine the nuances between the animation so it's a smoother animation.
Go for the 10 frames per second.
Now the difference here of course is quite stark.
One's going to mean you have 10 individual images of the five frames per second whereas 10 frames per
second is going to result in 20 separate images.
And that might be a bit much if you're up for the challenge.
Do go for it.
Just remember that when you export as an animated gif you can pick unspecified frames and set it to
either 200 milliseconds or 100 for five and 10 frames per seconds respectively.
Finally just a word of caution no larger than 128 by 128 pixels in the animated layer that you decide
to work on.
It can be a lot smaller than that but this is really the maximum kambiz size and it's more for your
own sanity than anything else.
With that in mind pause video now and give that a go.
Okay get looted a little love.
Okay everyone welcome back.
Let's go ahead now and I'm going to make my frown to grin.
See you overing him.
Right.
So now that we're back overing gimp I'm going to go ahead and make myself a new image.
I'm going to make mine 64 by 64 and I'm going to go through the method of creating a face by making
a big blob and then a small blob.
I could do the selection by fancy doing this this time.
So 60 there.
Oh give us a nice position or I've not got my pencil tool.
There we go.
And I'll be able to centre that face pretty well.
Okay I'm going to change the foreground colour to white and then I think if I go for 58 I'll be able
to put a blob in the middle with a nice border around it.
There we go.
Now of course you could go down the route of using the Ellipse select all and going down the border
route entirely up to you.
So I have a circle for my face and that's going to be the background there.
I know I'm gonna need a layer groups of them to create that now as well and call it frame hash one.
Then when I duplicate that frame I can just reuse it.
Now what parts of the face is static and what is not something I can repeat.
And I'm going to add this to the background just to keep things simple I don't want too many layers
at this point in time and I must set my pixel depth.
Sue let's and all pixel size down to 1 am going to draw the nose just here.
It's not drawing lines in a room because it's selected Tom White.
Silly me no.
Ever so there's a nose.
And I'm going from a smile to a frown.
So in that case I'm going to need a layer that changes.
Perhaps the mouth and then the eyebrows.
So the eyes themselves are going to be the same.
So in this particular case a 64 were 64 I think a size 22 note as far too big lets go for a size of
maybe 14.
Yeah that's good.
Better size with the eyes I'm going to go blob and Blob.
So the eyes themselves are not going to change.
Then finally reduce that down to 12.
Flip round my foreground and background colours.
And there we go.
Pretty much got the eyes done apart from the middle of them.
What shall we do for the middle.
Probably not too if I do too.
They'll end up with a cross.
No go.
So there we go we've got a basic smile while not a smiling face as we've not got anything on it yet
but now we've got the base layer done we can go ahead and create a new layer.
I'm going to do the mouth and the eyebrows separately.
Now thinking about it and practicing this before going ahead.
Hindsight's a wonderful thing.
I'm only going to use.
Eyebrows are not going to model each one individually.
They're going to be moving together.
It doesn't matter if there is a change.
Now one of the things I'm going to do again I've learned this as I was going through with this the best
way of handling this particular animation type is to hide the background layer for the next one so if
I go ahead and duplicate frame one everything's in place ready.
That's the structure that I'm going to be working to.
So I've got Let's put a mouth on.
Let's set it down at one pixel so I can draw a mouth and it will just be a rough mouth at this time.
Now I can't see it because that layers off.
So it's going from a frown so that's draw a frown and it is there.
Let's just turn those layers off so I can see what's going on.
I'm going to clear the lay eggs.
I've made a mistake with the delete key and then draw all the upside down mouth.
There we go.
So that's the frown for the mouth and the eyebrows.
Well he's not going to look very happy he's going to look something along those lines.
So that's the basic starting point.
Now I can go ahead enable my next layer and you can see that I can no longer see the eyebrows or mouth.
Now I can play about although pacitti we know that.
And I could for instance hide background one that's another way of doing it.
And this is a great starting point because now I can go ahead and jupe Tape frame to whilst it's in
this state come back down to frame.
So yeah that's made frame three come back down to frame two and put the new eyebrows in say they look
a bit like that and the mouth is a bit more neutral.
Something along those lines.
And then finally I can check fat by just toggling background one on and off and I can say Well I think
that the mouth raises up just a little bit too high on this side so I go in hard edged my eraser come
back with the pencil tool and again I'm not using a stylus or anything like that for this.
I'm literally just using my mouse or trackpad depending on how I'm feeling.
So that is that framed.
I'm happy with that I can cross check it again.
Yep that's good.
And now I can go up to frame three before I do anything on frame 3.
I duplicate it suffering for is available then I can go on and do the mouth.
So again I can make the mouth just a little bit more flat.
This time go to the eyebrows make them completely neutral.
There we go.
I'm happy with that.
Then I turn on background too and I can change between them.
Perfect.
Now go to frame four and repeat this.
And I'm going to do that now up to 10 frayne's and then I'm going to export my animation as a gif.
After checking of course and I'll be back with you guys in a few moments of the fastforward this next
bit as I'm just repeating the same task a few more times.
Okay so no sooner had I started I'd managed to duplicate the frame from beneath by accident.
And I've overwritten though so in this case if you do something like that it's not the end of the world
you can go ahead and duplicate the frame to go in and clear those frames that you've overwritten.
And again this is this is great that we're on these individual layers it gives us much more scope for
editing our particular image that we're working on.
Now going to go ahead and play that again.
Come back down to frame six and then add those eyebrows back on.
I'm going to unhide background.
I flew onto unhide for that.
So that's going to cause me a few issues further down.
There we go that's that sorted.
So essentially there is a nother queue here as we're going through because I know that the particular
labour group is finished the moment that I can see and I can't see here the face.
So we put that on and check.
We put that on check etc etc. As we go through.
So as I was going through their frame for frame five of the signs I need to go into frame five and remove
the eyebrows and mouth and do those An unhide the background so there we go we've got the chequered
Alpher look and then I can go in and put the new mouth fenn going the wrong way.
Let's make it more of a smile.
Am not that much of a smile.
Nope not that much of a smile that much of a smile.
And then finally the eyebrows again are going to raise them ever so slightly.
And then finally up at the background on that done and I can see the Labour group itself has a thumb
nail against it and I can see the progression there as we go.
Let's do the rest of them and I'll see you back in a few moments.
And here we go.
I'm just finishing it off now.
I think I'm happy with that.
I'm going to go to filter's animation and play back.
And that has probably appeared on one of my other monitors it has.
And let's just play that back.
So that looks okay to me.
And then to slow it down to point five of 10 frames per second because five frames per second is an
a choice and that's a realistic representation of how it's working the eyebrows do go a bit funny at
the end.
But overall I'm happy with that.
Now of course at this point in time I decide to go ahead and export it as a gif.
The problem I will have I'm just going to export it and overwrite one of my test animations before we
go ahead and export we will get the error message.
So at this point in time it's a good idea to save your work appropriately so at this point I've not
saved a slap on my wrists.
Please do remember to save as your going a long time for completely forgotten in this case.
So go ahead make sure you found your project folder and save it before you do anything destructive like
flattening layers down someone to save miners a frown to drain an onion and replace because I'd already
gone through this process to make sure it works okay.
And then of course I'm going to right click and merge the Labour group right click and merge the leg
group and I'm going to do that a further seven times.
And after I have done that I know I can go ahead and save as and call this flattened or flatten this
case.
I'll just overwrite that and there we go we've got a flattened sense now.
It may be more prudent to save as before you go ahead and do this destructive process just in case you
in advertently Savon lose your work.
I would recommend always working on an additional copy of something especially with larger projects.
Finally let's go ahead now and export as our newest export is a test animation just to see how it comes
out as an animation.
200 milliseconds so the whole thing lasts two seconds.
As per the spec of a challenge.
And then finally of course is to go and open that up.
And test animation too.
Here we go.
There we go 0 1 2 3 2 second animation of a frown to a.
Bit of a crazy smile bivy end.
But there we go.
How did you guys get on.
Remember you don't need to do that extra step of merging your layers unless you're exporting as a gif.
Otherwise I hope you've enjoyed this lecture and I will see you all in the next one.